---
title: Journaling
published_at: 2016-08-04T00:53:16Z
---

A month ago I started keeping a journal. I spend about ten minutes writing into
sometime during the day, and make sure that I have entries for every day, even
if I have to write them retroactively.

I find the exercise incredibly useful because it gives me an opportunity to
throw words down on paper with wild abandon. I'm a bit of a perfectionist, and
whenever I know that what I write might be visible publicly, getting anything
down is an excruciatingly slow process as I painfully deliberate over every
single word. That extra writing helps improve my technique, but has the
secondary benefit helping me warm up so that after finishing a day's journal I
can transition over to some sort of public writing and do it more effectively.

More importantly is how useful the journal is as a more reliable version of my
own memory. There are so many life experiences that are effectively gone unless
I have some sort of memory aid to bring them to light, my mind will never
naturally wander to them. They're not forgotten, but buried just far enough
below the surface to be hidden from my day to day thoughts.

Even reading over entries from the last month reminds me of relatively recent
experiences that would otherwise have faded by now, but seeing them in written
word recalls them in an instant. I wish I'd started the habit a decade ago
because by now I'd have a wealth of detail from my favorite vacations, memories
with family and friends, and favorite career moments.

Although I still romanticize journaling by hand, I keep mine in digital format
mostly because writing by hand is so slow compared to a keyboard. It's also
convenient because combined with Dropbox, it produces an archive that's safe
from disaster, and leaves less clutter around my apartment. I save it in plain
text organized by year, and edit the whole thing in Vim.
