---
title: Session Expiration
published_at: 2016-07-31T18:20:17Z
---

When you pop open and start using Uber's app on your iPhone, you drop a pin,
hit the "request" button, and a car shows up minutes later. Furthermore, the
flow stays that simple even if you haven't used the app in months.

Contrast that to a typical desktop app (which in today's world, are invariably
written to be used from a web browser), and there's a major difference: the
addition of a single time consuming and highly abrasive step: a login screen;
often coupled with a secondary two-factor challenge.

There was a time where shared computing environments were widespread where
aggressive session expiration was effective protection against people
forgetting to log out of their accounts, but times have changed, and most of us
are using personal computers with full disk encryption, strong passwords,
automatic screen locking, and web browsers far better vetted for security. I'd
personally be far more confident that my stolen laptop would be secure compared
to my iPhone protected by provably-breakable Apple technology (Apple ID) or a
four-digit PIN.

Maybe the most frustrating part is that in many cases expiration policies are
inversely proportional to the sensitivity of the account. Google gives me about
two weeks of runway on Gmail, a vault of paramount importance given that it can
be used to reset passwords on every other account that I own, but my public
library logs me out _every single day_ despite the fact that even if it were
compromised, very minimal damage would ever be possible.

When do web app authors start either trusting us, or giving us options to
indicate that we trust ourselves?
