---
title: Courage
published_at: 2016-09-09T14:15:35Z
hook: On 3.5 mm headphone jacks and narcissism.
---

I was waiting on a street corner in Seattle last weekend when a man with a box
over his shoulder walked up to me. "Hah!" he said with a motion towards a
nearby tent selling game counters and figurines. "I've never seen anything like
it. Grown men playing with little toys." Disdain dripped from the words.

"For my whole life, I've been an artist, architect, and baker," he continued.
"I'm running these supplies down to the bakery. Afterwards, I'm going to go
teach piano lessons. I'm an expert musician you see, and have been for thirty
years."

"Remarkable," I noted.

Although every word from his mouth might have been truth, the possibility was
remote. Anyone who had developed mastery in such a wide variety of subjects is
also likely to have developed a sense of humility to go with it. Humility that
would tend to restrict shameless self-aggrandizement, or the unabashed
belittlement of peers.

Two days ago Phil Schiller got up on a stage and talked about the removal of
the 3.5 mm headphone jack on the iPhone 7. "The reason to move on: courage. The
courage to move on and do something new that betters all of us," he said with
grandiose embellishment infamously characteristic of Apple.

The removal of the 3.5 mm jack is a mistake. Apple's suggested replacements are
lightning-compatible and wireless earphones. Lightning is a strange proprietary
standard that's unlikely to gain wide adoption, and even if it does, doesn't
hold a peripheral nearly as securely as a 3.5 mm jack, which makes it
unsuitable for movement or exercise. Bluetooth is a "95% technology". It works
95% of the time, but the remaining 5%, characterized by mysterious inabilities
to connect, playback interruptions, and audio desyncing, is enough to make it
maddening to use and borderline untenable. Add in that you've now got a new
battery to charge daily, and it's hard to argue that Apple hasn't just knocked
us down two rungs on the ladder of progress.

Apologists point towards Apple's great historical track record in making
forward thinking choices; for example, the exclusion of floppy disk drives,
serial, or PS/2 ports. This is selective memory. Apple's most recent
deprecation play was the 12" MacBook which was stripped of MagSafe, USB, and
Thunderbolt so that they could show the world that a single USB-C port is
enough for anyone. A _year and a half_ after its release the computer is still
awkward to use with few useful peripherals, and with none from Apple itself.
